docs: update monitoring documentation with accurate details (#601)
openebs/website: docs/main/user-guides/replicated-storage-user-guide/replicated-pv-mayastor/advanced-operations/monitoring.md

keywords:
 - Monitoring
 - Pool metrics
 - Node metrics
 - Replica metrics
 - Volume metrics
 - Replicated PV Mayastor Stats
description: This guide explains about the IO engine metrics exporter and obs-callhome stats exporter.
---
# Mayastor metrics reference

Replicated PV Mayastor exposes metrics from two different sources: the metrics exporter sidecar in the I/O-engine pod, and the call-home stats container in the call-home pod.

## Source: I/O-engine pod — metrics exporter container

Exposed at port `9502`, path `/metrics`.

> The metrics below — grouped by resource: disk pools, nodes, replicas, and volumes — come from this exporter. Each is a live Prometheus gauge, polled inline with the Prometheus client's scrape cycle rather than cached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metrics below — grouped by resource: diskpool, nodes, replicas, and volumes — come from this exporter. Each is a live Prometheus gauge, polled inline with the Prometheus client's scrape cycle rather than cached.
```

| `diskpool_used_size_bytes` | gauge | `name`, `node` | Used size of the pool, in bytes |
| `diskpool_write_latency_us` | gauge | `name=<pool_id>`, `node=<pool_node>` | Total write latency for all IOs on the pool, in microseconds |

> The alert-reason metrics aren't separate counters per reason — each is a single metric where the reason labels (`io_error`, `io_stalled`, etc.) indicate which condition is contributing to that alert level.

## Node metrics

| Metric | Type | Labels | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `mayastor_node_cordoned` | gauge | `node_id` | Indicates if the Mayastor node is cordoned |
| `mayastor_node_draining` | gauge | `node_id` | Indicates if the Mayastor node is draining |
| `mayastor_node_online` | gauge | `node_id` | Indicates if the Mayastor node is online |

## Replica metrics

| Metric | Type | Labels | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `replica_bytes_read` | gauge | `name=<replica_uuid>`, `pv_name=<pv_name>`, `node=<replica_node>` | Total bytes read on the replica |
| `replica_bytes_written` | gauge | `name=<replica_uuid>`, `pv_name=<pv_name>`, `node=<replica_node>` | Total bytes written on the replica |

> | `replica_num_read_ops` | gauge | `name=<replica_uuid>`, `pool_id=<pool_uuid>`, `pv_name=<pv_name>`, `node=<replica_node>` | Number of read operations on the replica |

Author: Done

| `replica_num_write_ops` | gauge | `name=<replica_uuid>`, `pv_name=<pv_name>`, `node=<replica_node>` | Number of write operations on the replica |
| `replica_read_latency_us` | gauge | `name=<replica_uuid>`, `pv_name=<pv_name>`, `node=<replica_node>` | Total read latency for all IOs on the replica, in microseconds |

> | `replica_write_latency_us` | gauge | `name=<replica_uuid>`, `pv_name=<pv_name>`, `node=<replica_node>` | Total write latency for all IOs on the replica, in microseconds |

Author: Done

## Volume metrics

| Metric | Type | Labels | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `volume_bytes_read` | gauge | `pv_name=<pv_name>` | Total bytes read through the volume target |
| `volume_bytes_written` | gauge | `pv_name=<pv_name>` | Total bytes written through the volume target |

> | `volume_num_read_ops` | gauge | `pv_name=<pv_name>` | Number of read operations through the volume target |

Author: Done

| `volume_num_write_ops` | gauge | `pv_name=<pv_name>` | Number of write operations through the volume target |
| `volume_read_latency_us` | gauge | `pv_name=<pv_name>` | Total read latency for all IOs through the volume target, in microseconds |

> | `volume_write_latency_us` | gauge | `pv_name=<pv_name>` | Total write latency for all IOs through the volume target, in microseconds |

Author: Done

## Deriving IOPS, latency, and throughput

> The metrics above are raw, cumulative counters. To get IOPS, average latency, or throughput for a dashboard, compute them across two successive polls of the *same* resource (pool, replica, or volume):

Author: Done

**R/W IOPS**

```
write_iops = (num_write_ops_current - num_write_ops_previous) / poll_period_sec
read_iops  = (num_read_ops_current  - num_read_ops_previous)  / poll_period_sec
```

**R/W latency**

```
read_latency_avg  = (read_latency_current  - read_latency_previous)  / (num_read_ops_current  - num_read_ops_previous)
write_latency_avg = (write_latency_current - write_latency_previous) / (num_write_ops_current - num_write_ops_previous)
```

> 

Author: Done

**R/W throughput**

```
read_throughput  = (bytes_read_current    - bytes_read_previous)    / poll_period_sec
write_throughput = (bytes_written_current - bytes_written_previous) / poll_period_sec
```

**Handling counter resets**

These counters are not persistent across I/O engine restarts — they reset to zero when the engine restarts. If the current-poll value is lower than the previous-poll value, the formulas above will go negative. In that case, fall back to:

```
iops (r/w)        = num_ops (r/w) / poll_cycle
latency_avg (r/w) = latency (r/w) / num_ops

> throughput (r/w)  = bytes_read/written / poll_cycle (in seconds)

Author: Done
